# Introduction
Prithvi Narayan Shah[4] (Nepali: श्री ५ बडामहाराजाधिराज पृथ्वीनारायण शाह देव, romanized: Shri Panch Badamaharajadhiraj Prithvi Narayan Shah Dev; 7 January 1723 – 11 January 1775), was the last king of the Gorkha Kingdom and first king of the Kingdom of Nepal (also called the Kingdom of Gorkha). Prithvi Narayan Shah started the unification of Nepal.[5]

Prithvi Narayan Shah is considered the Father of the Nation in Nepal.[6][7]

# Early years
 Prithvi Narayan Shah was born prematurely on 7 January 1723 as the first child of Nara Bhupal Shah and Kaushalyavati Devi in the Gorkha Palace.[8][9]
Idols of PrithviNarayan Shah with his two wives

Prince Prithvi Narayan Shah's education began at age five through the appropriate ceremony. At that time, the responsibility to educate him was given to Mokchyeshwor Aryal and Bhanu Aryal. They were the Upadhyayas who worked in the palace as astrologers, where they were also known as Jyotishi or Jaisi[citation needed]. Even though the Gurus provided his primary education, the duty of developing his character was taken on by Queen Chandra Pravawati[citation needed]. It is said that seeing the princes of neighboring states Tanahun, Lamjung, and Kaski indulge in excess pleasure, Chandra Pravawati kept Prithvi Narayan Shah away from pleasurable or wrong pursuits. That is why no traces of pleasurable pursuits and diversion can be found in his early life. [verification needed] Narbhupal Shah wanted P.N. Shah to marry a strong family so that it would assist him if needed. The best prospect of marriage that he saw fit was with the Kingdom of Makwanpur. P.N. Shah had turned 14 in 1737 C.E. and it was decided that he would marry Indrakumari, the daughter of Hemkarna Sen, the Princess of Makwanpur in the Pre-Unification Nepal.[10]

From a young age, he took an interest in the affairs of his father's state and soon began to take on these responsibilities. Prithvi Narayan Shah had an early dream of conquering Nuwakot, partially because his father had lost it to the Mallas of Kathmandu in an earlier war. After the death of his father in 1743 AD, Prithvi Narayan Shah ascended to the throne of Gorkha at the age of 20. As king, he valued his people and enjoyed talking to them about their general concerns. This practice helped him to build a rapport with his people and helped him to understand the requirements of the citizens of Gorkha. King Shah sealed his borders and maintained a friendly diplomatic relationship with his neighbors, with the exception of the East India Company, which ignored Nepal and refused to open trade relations at the time.[11] 

# Reign and military career
Before Prithvi Narayan Shah's unification movement, there were a total of 54 states in Nepal. The 54 states were named as Baisi Rajya and Chaubise Rajya. In the South-Eastern Terai, there were three Sen states: Makawanpur, Bijayapur, and Chaudandi. In the West, from Gorkha to Gandaki Province, there were 24 states. In the province of Karnali, there were 22 states with Kalyan, Samaal, Shahi and Chand dynasties. Along with Gorkha and Mustang, Bhaktapur, Kantipur and Lalitpur made up the remaining five states.[12]
Prithvi Narayan Shah consulting with his first Army Chief Senapati Shivaram Singh Basnyat

When Prithvi Narayan Shah ascended to the throne of Gorkha on 3 April 1743 A.D., it was still a small state. He then started to contemplate the methods for turning Gorkha into a huge and strong state. He went to Varanasi to gain first-hand knowledge about the neighbouring states and about India to the south. During those days, Varanasi was one of the largest trade centres in India where people from different places gathered. He met with different types of people and gained valuable understandings regarding the Political and Social conditions of the Indian Sub-Continent. In Varanasi, his father-in-law Abhiman Singh, a Thakuri Chief, procured for him some firearms and a quantity of ammunition.[13][14]
